Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and share
the video to help spread this free series of
videos. Thanks for your help. Also, remember
to sign up via the link in the description to
get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the
CCNA. It’s a network simulator with tons of
guided labs covering all of the topics you
need to know for the CCNA. Click the link
in the video description to check it out.
In this lab we’ll use TFTP and FTP on R1
and R2 to get updated IOS image files,
and then reboot the routers with the new
version. First, let’s take a look at SRV1.
From the services tab, if I click on TFTP, you
can see at the top that the TFTP service is
enabled by default, so SRV1 will respond to any
TFTP clients trying to download or upload files.
And down below is a list of files currently
on SRV1, these are operating system files for
various kinds of devices. The one we’ll be copying
to R1 and R2 is this one here, the same one as in
the lecture video. Okay, then I’ll click on the
FTP tab. The FTP service is enabled by default,
and because FTP uses username and password
authentication, there is a list of FTP users here.
The default username and password in Packet
Tracer is cisco and cisco, but I created this one,
username jeremy password ccna. And below
that the same OS files are available.
Step 1 of the lab is to configure IP addresses and
any necessary routing to allow full connectivity.
For the purpose of this video, I’ve already
done that. I configured IP addresses on SRV1,
R1, and R2, and configured a static route to
10.0.0.0/24 on R2. So, let’s go on to step 2.
On R1 I’ll use TFTP to get the new IOS file from
SRV1. First, I’ll check the current version on R1.
ENABLE. SHOW VERSION, and check the top line
of the output. So, the current version is 15.1,
and the file I’m going to download from SRV1 is
15.5. Let’s check the current file in flash. SHOW
FLASH. There it is. Okay, let’s copy that
new file into flash. The command is COPY TFTP
FLASH. Now SRV1’s address, 10.0.0.1. Now the name
of the file we want to copy. I copied the name
beforehand, so I’ll just paste it in here. And now
I’m asked what name I want to save the file as.
The default option is in the square brackets
here, I’ll just hit enter to use that filename.
And this should only take a few seconds.
Okay, now the file has been copied into
the flash of R1. Let’s check. SHOW FLASH.
There it is. So next let’s configure R1
to boot with this new version of IOS.
CONF T. The command is BOOT SYSTEM FLASH, and then
the file name, I’ll paste it here again. Now I’ll
EXIT out. And before reloading the system I must
make sure to save the config, or else the BOOT
SYSTEM command won’t take effect. WRITE. Okay,
finally I’ll use RELOAD to restart the router.
Rebooting a real router can take several
minutes, but fortunately in packet tracer
the process is quite fast. So, let’s check to make
sure that R1 is now using the new version of IOS.
ENABLE. SHOW VERSION. Okay, R1 is now using the
newer version of IOS. So the final step here on R1
is to delete the old file from flash. SHOW FLASH.
So, I’m just going to copy the filename here.
And then delete it with DELETE FLASH:, with
a colon, and then paste in the filename.
Then confirm that I really want
to delete it, and now let’s check.
SHOW FLASH. Okay, the old IOS file is now
gone. Now I’m going to copy the filename
of the new IOS version again since I’ll
use it on R2. Okay, that’s all for R1.
On R2 we’ll do basically the same thing,
but let’s do it using FTP instead of
TFTP. First let’s check R2’s current version.
ENABLE. SHOW VERSION. R2 is also using 15.1.
To use FTP, let’s configure the username
and password. CONF T. IP FTP USERNAME
jeremy. IP FTP PASSWORD ccna. That’s it, now
we can copy the file just like in TFTP. EXIT.
So, let’s get that IOS file from SRV1. COPY
FTP FLASH. Enter SRV1’s IP address, 10.0.0.1.
And then I’ll paste the filename. And hit
enter to use the same filename here on R2.
Okay, now in packet tracer FTP is
actually much slower than TFTP.
In fact I thought it wasn’t working since it
takes so much longer than TFTP. But be patient,
and it will work. I’m going to pause my recording
now and return when the transfer finishes.
Okay, the transfer finished successfully.
Let’s check the file in flash.
SHOW FLASH. There it is. Now just like on R1
I’ll configure R2 to boot using this IOS file.
CONF T. BOOT SYSTEM FLASH, and then
paste in the filename once again.
Then EXIT. And WRITE to save the
configuration. Now let’s reload R2. RELOAD.
Once again, this should only take about
10 seconds or so in packet tracer,
but on a real router it will take several minutes.
So, let’s check if R2 is now using the
new version of IOS. ENABLE. SHOW VERSION.
There it is, version 15.5. To finish up,
let’s delete the old IOS file from flash.
SHOW FLASH. Then copy the file name.
And delete it with DELETE FLASH:,
and paste in the file name. And that’s
it, let’s check. SHOW FLASH. Okay,
the file has been deleted. So, in this lab we
practiced copying files from a server using TFTP
and FTP. We also updated the IOS version of these
routers and removed the old IOS files from flash.
That’s all for this lab. Next let’s take a look at
a bonus lab in Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim lab preview.
The lab is Trivial File Transfer Protocol, TFTP.
So in this lab we will use TFTP to
backup Router4's configuration file.
So, this is another use for TFTP or FTP. Not to
download new versions of IOS, but to backup files,
for example the device's configuration. So
let's go right to the lab tasks. There are
8 lab tasks and we'll do all of them. So
step 1 has us configuring the IP adress and
default gateway on PC1 and PC3. These two PCs
here. So I will open the CLI of PC1 and PC3.
And the commands to do this in
Boson NetSim are IPCONFIG /IP.
Okay that configures PC1's
IP address. And then IPCONFIG
/DG to configure the default
gateway. So that's PC1. Next, PC3.
Okay, so that's step 1. Next step 2. On
Router4 attempt to ping PC1. The ping should
be successful. Okay, so from Router4 I'll
ping PC1. Let me open the CLI of Router4.
Oh there's a password. Okay the
password is Cisco. And let's ping PC1.
Okay, no problem. Next, step 3. On Router4
copy the running configuration to the TFTP
server. Okay, so I'm already on Router4. The
command is COPY, and then the source this
time is the running configuration. So, COPY
RUNNING-CONFIG, and the destination will be
TFTP. And then the address is
PC1's address, 192.168.1.2.
Okay, the destination filename, I'll name it
r4config. Alright, there we go. Okay next on the
TFTP server, which is PC1, verify that Router4's
configuration has been successfully backed up.
Okay, so the command to do that in NetSim
is SHOW TFTP-CONFIGS. And as it says here,
that is not a standard PC command. It
is just a command used in Boson NetSim.
So let's check. SHOW TFTP-CONFIGS. And there is
the file, r4config. And here is the file size.
Okay, next step 5. In the following steps
you will restore the configuration you saved
on the TFTP server to NVRAM, that's
where the startup config is saved,
on Router4 and verify that the starting
configuration was updated successfully.
Okay, so first it has us change
the host name to MainRouter.
Okay, so when we backed up the config of Router4
the host name was Router4. So in this file here,
r4config, the host name is saved as Router4.
Now we're going to change it to MainRouter.
Okay and now we're going to
restore the configuration
from the TFTP server to the NVRAM of Router4.
So the command is COPY, and the source is
TFTP, and we're going to save it to
the startup config which is in NVRAM.
The address is 192.168.1.2. And the source
filename is r4config. Okay, there we go. You
should now see the restored configuration
in NVRAM. Does NetSim have SHOW NVRAM?
Maybe no, let me see. SHOW NVRAM. It does
not, but we can just do SHOW STARTUP-CONFIG.
And the hostname is this config
file is Router4 as you can see here.
But the hostname is still MainRouter
because that's in the startup-config file,
it's not in the running config. So in step 7
we're going to issue the COPY STARTUP-CONFIG
RUNNING-CONFIG command to apply that
configuration to the running-config. So, COPY
STARTUP-CONFIG RUNNING-CONFIG. And now
the host name changes back to Router4.
Okay, finally step 8. Is it necessary to
clear Router4's NVRAM in order to copy a
file into it? Explain why or why not. Okay
so I have not covered this in the course.
Let me show you Boson's explanation. So it is
not necessary to clear Router4's NVRAM in order
to copy a file into it. So when you copy a file
into NVRAM it totally overwrites that file. So if
there's a startup config and you copy a new config
to that file, the old file is totally deleted
and replaced with the new file. However as
it says here, when you copy a file into DRAM,
or the running configuration which is in DRAM,
the files merge. So the new file doesn't totally
replace the original file, they
merge, they become combined.
Anyways, you don't have to know that much
detail I think for the current CCNA exam.
But it's an interesting point. Okay, so that's
all for this lab. Since we did all of the tasks,
let's check with the 'grade lab' function
here. So I'll click on this button.
And we completed the lab successfully, perfect.
So all of the configurations are correct.
Okay so that was Boson's NetSim for CCNA. I think
this is a great resource for the CCNA. Theres 100+
guided detailed labs like this covering all
of the topics you need to know for the CCNA.
If you want to get Boson NetSim, please
follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to Abraham, Serge, Njoku, Viktor,
Roger, Raj, Kenneth, Seamus, H W, Brandon,
Samil, Aaron, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Anthony, Junhong, Benjamin, Tshepiso,
Justin, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming,
Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark,
Yousif, Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan,
and Vance. Sorry if I pronounced your name
incorrectly, but thank you so much for your
support. This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, March 14th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.